See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/317185136

Deep Learning and Its Applications: A Review
Conference Paper · October 2016

CITATIONS

READS

0

3,058

3 authors:
Nur Farhana Hordri

Siti Yuhaniz

Universiti Teknologi Malaysia

Universiti Teknologi Malaysia

8 PUBLICATIONS 15 CITATIONS

35 PUBLICATIONS 556 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

SEE PROFILE

Siti Mariyam Shamsuddin
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia
385 PUBLICATIONS 3,042 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Enhancement of artificial neural network learning using centripetal accelerated particle swarm optimization for medical diseases diagnosis View project

quantum based meta-heuristic algorithm for elman recurrent neural network learning View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Nur Farhana Hordri on 29 May 2017.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Deep Learning and Its Applications: A Review
Nur Farhana Hordri*1, 2, Siti Sophiayati Yuhaniz1, 2, Siti Mariyam Shamsuddin2
1

Advanced Informatics School, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Jalan Sultan Yahya Petra, 54100 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
2
UTM Big Data Centre, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Skudai, 81310, Johor, Malaysia.

Abstract
In the past few years, Deep Learning has becoming a trend. Since deep learning attempts to
make a better analysis and can learn massive amounts of unlabeled data, deep learning has
been applied to several of fields. Hence, this paper presents a review on deep learning and
its applications over the years, with a goal of providing useful references to other researchers
to get the idea for new application with deep learning in future research. There are seven
applications that have been applied with deep learning were identified, namely automatic
speech recognition, image recognition, natural language processing, drug discovery and
toxicology, customer relationship management, recommendation systems and
bioinformatics. For each of these, we discuss the results of the study and also point out the
areas in need of further research.
Keywords: Deep Learning, Applications
1. Introduction
Deep Learning (DL) or more commonly known as deep structured learning or hierarchical
learning is a division of Machine Learning (ML) which is based on a set of algorithms that
attempt to model high-level abstractions in data, [1, 2]. Such algorithms develop a layered,
hierarchical architecture of learning and representing data. This hierarchical learning
architecture is inspired by artificial intelligence emulating the deep, layered learning process
of the primary sensorial areas of the neocortex in human brain, which automatically extracts
features and abstractions from underlying data [3, 4, 5]. Based on [6, 7], DL algorithms are
useful when it comes to dealing with large amounts of unsupervised data and naturally learn
data representations in a greedy layer-wise method.
In recent years, there are a number of researchers have applied DL algorithms to various
different fields. Therefore, the purpose of this paper is to review and to discuss the
applications that have been done over the years with DL algorithms. We will discuss further
in Section 2, which may assists other researcher to study DL and its applications. Finally,
the conclusion of this review is expressed in Section 3.

* Corresponding author. E-mail address: nfarhana64@live.utm.my

2.

The Applications of Deep Learning

This section describes the foundation of this review by discussing several of fields that have
been applied with Deep Learning algorithm.
Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR)
Google has announced that Google voice search had taken a new turn by adopting Deep
Neural Networks (DNN) as the core technology used to model the sounds of a language in
2012 [8]. DNN replaced Gaussian Mixture Model which has been in the industry for 30
years. DNN also has proved that it is better able to measure which sound a user is fabricating
at every instant in time and with this they delivered prominently increased speech
recognition accuracy.
In 2013, DL has gained full momentum in both ASR and ML [9]. DL is basically linked to
the use of multiple layers of nonlinear transformations to derive speech features, while
learning with shallow layers comprises the use of exemplar-based representations for speech
features which have high dimensionality but typically vacant entries.
Image Recognition
Deep max-pooling convolutional neural networks is used to detect mitosis in breast
histology images was presented in [10]. Mitosis detection is very hard. In fact, mitosis is a
complex process during which a cell nucleus undergoes various transformations. In this
approach, DNN as powerful pixel classifier which operates on raw pixel values and no
human input is needed. Hence, DNN automatically learns a set of visual features from the
training data. DNN is tested on a publicly available dataset and significantly outperforms
all competing techniques, with manageable computational effort: processing a 4MPixel
image requires few minutes on a standard laptop.
Large and deep convolutional neural network is trained to classify the 1.2 million highresolution images in the ImageNet LSVRC-2010 contest into 1000 different classes [11].
On the test data, they achieved top-1 and top-5 error rates of 37.5% and 17.0% which is
considerably better than the previous state-of-the-art. From all the experiments, the results
can be improved simply by waiting for faster GPUs and bigger datasets to become available.
Natural Language Processing
Recently, deep learning methods have been successfully applied to a variety of language
and information retrieval applications. By exploiting deep architectures, deep learning
techniques are able to discover from training data the hidden structures and features at
different levels of abstractions useful for the any tasks. In 2013, [12] proposed a series of
Deep Structured Semantic Models (DSSM) for Web search. More specifically, they uses a
DNN to rank a set of documents for a given query as follows. First, a non-linear projection
is performed to map the query and the documents to a common semantic space. Then, the
relevance of each document given the query is calculated as the cosine similarity between
their vectors in that semantic space. The neural network models are discriminatively trained
using the click-through data such that the conditional likelihood of the clicked document
given the query is maximized. The new models are evaluated on a Web document ranking

task using a real-world data set. Results show that the proposed model significantly
outperforms other latent semantic models, which were considered state-of-the-art in the
performance prior to the work presented in [12].
Drug Discovery and Toxicology
Quantitative Structure Analysis/Prediction Studies (QSAR/QSPR) attempt to build
mathematical models relating physical and chemical properties of compounds to their
chemical structure. In [13], multi-task learning is applied to QSAR using various neural
network models. They used an artificial neural network to learn a function that predicts
activities of compounds for multiple assays at the same time. The method is compared with
alternative methods and reported that the neural nets with multi-tasking can lead to
significantly improved results over baselines generated with random forests.
In 2015, AtomNet has been introduced as first structure-based, deep convolutional neural
network which designed to predict the bioactivity of small molecules for drug discovery
applications [14]. This paper also demonstrates how to apply the convolutional concepts of
feature locality and hierarchical composition to the modeling of bioactivity and chemical
interactions. AtomNet outperforms previous docking approaches on a diverse set of
benchmarks by a large margin, achieving an AUC greater than 0.9 on 57.8% of the targets
in the DUDE benchmark.
Customer Relationship Management
A framework for autonomous control of a customer relationship management system been
charted by [15].First, a modified version of the widely accepted Recency-FrequencyMonetary Value system of metrics can be used to define the state space of clients or donors
is explored. Second, a procedure to determine the optimal direct marketing action in discrete
and continuous action space for the given individual, based on his position in the state space
is described. The procedure involves the use of model-free Q-learning to train a deep neural
network that relates a client's position in the state space to rewards associated with possible
marketing activities. The estimated value function over the client state space can be
interpreted as customer lifetime value (CLV), and thus allows for a quick plug-in estimation
of CLV for a given client. Experimental results are presented, based on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining Tools Competition, mailing dataset of donation solicitations.
Recommendation Systems
Automatic music recommendation has become an increasingly relevant problem in recent
years, since a lot of music is now sold and consumed digitally. Most recommender systems
rely on collaborative filtering. In 2013, [16] proposed to use a latent factor model for
recommendation, and predict the latent factors from music audio when they cannot be
obtained from usage data. Traditional approach is compared using a bag-of-words
representation of the audio signals with deep convolutional neural networks, and the
predictions is evaluated by quantitatively and qualitatively on the Million Song Dataset. The
result shows that the recent advances in DL translate very well to the music recommendation
setting, with deep convolutional neural networks significantly outperforming the traditional
approach.

Recent online services rely heavily on automatic personalization to recommend relevant
content to a large number of users. This requires systems to scale promptly to accommodate
the stream of new users visiting the online services for the first time. Work by [17] in 2015
proposed a content-based recommendation system to address both the recommendation
quality and the system scalability. They also proposed to use a rich feature set to represent
users, according to their web browsing history and search queries. They use a DL approach
to map users and items to a latent space where the similarity between users and their
preferred items is maximized. Scalability analysis show that the multi-view DNN model
can easily scale to encompass millions of users and billions of item entries.
Bioinformatics
The annotation of genomic information is a major challenge in biology and bioinformatics.
Existing databases of known gene functions are incomplete and prone to errors, and the
bimolecular experiments needed to improve these databases are slow and costly. While
computational methods are not a substitute for experimental verification, they can help in
two ways: algorithms can aid in the curation of gene annotations by automatically
suggesting inaccuracies, and they can predict previously-unidentified gene functions,
accelerating the rate of gene function discovery. In this work [18], an algorithm that
achieves both goals using deep auto encoder neural networks is developed. With
experiments on gene annotation data from the Gene Ontology project, it shows that deep
auto encoder networks achieve better performance than other standard machine learning
methods, including the popular truncated singular value decomposition.
3.

Conclusion

Based on Section 2, there are seven applications that have been applied with Deep Learning
were identified. The applications are:
a)
Automatic Speech Recognition
b)
Image Recognition
c)
Natural Language Processing
d)
Drug Discovery and Toxicology
e)
Customer Relationship Management
f)
Recommendation Systems
g)
Bioinformatics
Deep Learning is a fast-moving and proliferating discipline. It is not easy to form a wellbalanced and well-informed summary view of the newest developments in this field. Thus,
it is still harder to have a vision of its future applications.
Acknowledgement
This work is funded by Fundamental Research Grant Scheme (FRGS) under the title
“Enhancing Data Analytics Algorithms Using Deep Learning Approaches in Predicting Big
Data Cyber-Enabled Crimes” with project number R.K130000.7838.4F877.

References
[1]
Hinton, G. E., Osindero, S., & Teh, Y. W. (2006). A fast learning algorithm for deep belief
nets. Neural computation, 18(7), 1527-1554.
[2]
Bengio, Y. (2009). Learning deep architectures for AI. Foundations and trends® in
Machine Learning, 2(1), 1-127.
[3]
Bengio, Y., & LeCun, Y. (2007). Scaling learning algorithms towards AI. Large-scale
kernel machines, 34(5).
[4]
Bengio, Y., Courville, A., & Vincent, P. (2013). Representation learning: A review and new
perspectives. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 35(8), 1798-1828.
[5]
Arel, I., Rose, D. C., & Karnowski, T. P. (2010). Deep machine learning-a new frontier in
artificial intelligence research [research frontier]. IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine, 5(4),
13-18.
[6]
Hinton, G. E., Osindero, S., & Teh, Y. W. (2006). A fast learning algorithm for deep belief
nets. Neural computation, 18(7), 1527-1554.
[7]
Bengio, Y., Lamblin, P., Popovici, D., & Larochelle, H. (2007). Greedy layer-wise training
of deep networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 19, 153.
[8]
Hasim Sak, Andrew Senior, Kanishka Rao, Françoise Beaufays and Johan Schalkwyk
(September 2015): Google voice search: faster and more accurate.
[9]
Deng, L., & Li, X. (2013). Machine learning paradigms for speech recognition: An
overview. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 21(5), 1060-1089.
[10]
Ciresan, D. C., Giusti, A., Gambardella, L. M., & Schmidhuber, J. (2013, September).
Mitosis detection in breast cancer histology images with deep neural networks. In International
Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-assisted Intervention (pp. 411-418).
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[11]
Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., & Hinton, G. E. (2012). Imagenet classification with deep
convolutional neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 10971105).
[12]
Huang, P. S., He, X., Gao, J., Deng, L., Acero, A., & Heck, L. (2013, October). Learning
deep structured semantic models for web search using clickthrough data. In Proceedings of the 22nd
ACM international conference on Conference on information & knowledge management (pp. 23332338). ACM.
[13]
Dahl, G. E., Jaitly, N., & Salakhutdinov, R. (2014). Multi-task neural networks for QSAR
predictions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.1231.
[14]
Wallach, I., Dzamba, M., & Heifets, A. (2015). AtomNet: A Deep Convolutional Neural
Network for Bioactivity Prediction in Structure-based Drug Discovery. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1510.02855.
[15]
Tkachenko, Y. (2015). Autonomous CRM Control via CLV Approximation with Deep
Reinforcement Learning in Discrete and Continuous Action Space. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1504.01840.
[16]
Van den Oord, A., Dieleman, S., & Schrauwen, B. (2013). Deep content-based music
recommendation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (pp. 2643-2651).
[17]
Elkahky, A. M., Song, Y., & He, X. (2015, May). A multi-view deep learning approach for
cross domain user modeling in recommendation systems. In Proceedings of the 24th International
Conference on World Wide Web (pp. 278-288). ACM.
[18]
Chicco, D., Sadowski, P., & Baldi, P. (2014, September). Deep autoencoder neural networks
for gene ontology annotation predictions. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM Conference on
Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and Health Informatics (pp. 533-540). ACM.

View publication stats

